Add DS custom environments (#258)
seqeralabs/docs: platform_versioned_docs/version-24.1/data_studios/index.mdx

---
title: "Overview"

> description: "Data Studios public preview."

Author: @robnewman, what are the GA plans for this? Thanks!

> description: "Data Studios public preview."

Reviewer: It's still in public preview, so it can stay as-is. :)

date: "1 Oct 2024"
tags: [data, studios]
---

Data Studios is a unified platform where you can host a combination of container images and compute environments for interactive analysis using your preferred tools, like JupyterLab and RStudio Notebooks, Visual Studio Code IDEs, or Xpra remote desktops. Each data studio session is an individual interactive environment that encapsulates the live environment for dynamic data analysis.

> On Seqera Cloud, the free tier permits only one running data studio session at a time. To run simultaneous sessions, [contact Seqera][contact] for a Seqera Cloud Pro license.

Reviewer: The [contact] link isn't working in prod - it just shows up as what it looks like here. Anything we can do to fix it?

Author: That's really weird.

Author: They render correctly locally, though.

Author: It also is working here: https://deploy-preview-258--seqera-docs.netlify.app/platform/24.1/data_studios

:::note

> Data Studios is currently in **public preview** and is available from Seqera Platform v24.1. If you experience any problems during the deployment process [contact Seqera support](https://support.seqera.io). Data Studios in Enterprise is not enabled by default. You can enable Data Studios in the [environment variables configuration](../enterprise/data-studios.mdx).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data Studios is currently in **public preview** and is available from Seqera Platform v24.1. [Contact Seqera support](https://support.seqera.io) if you experience any problems during the deployment process. Data Studios in Enterprise is not enabled by default. You can enable Data Studios in the [environment variables configuration](../enterprise/data-studios.mdx).
```

:::

## Requirements

Before you get started, ensure you have the following:

- Valid credentials to access your cloud storage data resources.
- At least the **Maintain** role set of permissions.
- A compute environment with sufficient resources. This is highly dependent on the volume of data you wish to process, but we recommended at least 2 CPUs allocated with 8192 MB of memory. See [AWS Batch](../compute-envs/aws-batch.mdx) for more information about compute environment configuration.
- [Data Explorer](../data/data-explorer.mdx) is enabled.

:::note
Currently, Data Studios only supports AWS Batch compute environments that **do not** have Fargate enabled.
:::

## Container image templates

> Data Studios provides four container image templates: JupyterLab, RStudio Server, Visual Studio Code, and Xpra. The image templates install a very limited number of packages when the session container is built. Users have permission to install additional packages as needed.

Reviewer: Might be worth breaking the 4 images into a bulleted list.

Reviewer: Who do users have permission from, to install additional packages?

> In addition, you can create your own container image templates. For more information, see [Custom environments][custom-envs].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also create your own container image templates. For more information, see [Custom environments][custom-envs].
```

- `jupyter-collaboration=1.2.0`
- `jupyterlab-git=0.50.1`
- `jupytext=1.16.4`
- `jupyter-dash=0.4.2`
- `ipywidgets=7.8.4`
- `pandas[all]=2.2.3`
- `scikit-learn=1.5.2`
- `statsmodels=0.14.4`
- `itables=2.2.2`
- `seaborn[stats]=0.13.2`
- `altair=5.4.1`
- `plotly=5.24.1`
- `r-ggplot2=3.5.1`
- `nb_black=1.0.7`
- `qgrid=1.3.1`

To install additional Python packages, execute `!pip install <packagename>` commands in your notebook environment. Additional system-level packages can be installed in a terminal window using `apt install <packagename>`.

**RStudio Server 4.4.1**

The default user is the `root` account. To install R packages, execute `install.packages("<packagename>")` commands in your notebook environment. Additional system-level packages can be installed in a terminal window using `apt install <packagename>`.

**Visual Studio Code 1.93.1**

[Visual Studio Code][vsc] is an integrated development environment (IDE) that supports many programming languages. The default user is the `root` account. To install extensions, select **Extensions**. Additional system-level packages can be installed in a terminal window using `apt install <packagename>`.

**Xpra 6.2.0**

> [Xpra](https://github.com/Xpra-org/xpra), known as _screen for X_, allows you to run X11 programs by giving you remote access to individual graphical applications. The container template image also installs NVIDIA Linux x64 (AMD64/EM64T) drivers for Ubuntu 22.04 for running GPU-enabled applications. To use these GPU drivers, make sure that your compute environment specifies GPU instance families.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Xpra](https://github.com/Xpra-org/xpra), known as _screen for X_, allows you to run X11 programs by giving you remote access to individual graphical applications. The container template image also installs NVIDIA Linux x64 (AMD64/EM64T) drivers for Ubuntu 22.04 for running GPU-enabled applications. To use these GPU drivers, your compute environment must specify GPU instance families.
```

The default user is the `root` account. The image is based on `ubuntu:jammy`. Additional system-level packages can be installed in a terminal window using `apt install <package_name>`.

## Session statuses

Data studios have the following possible statuses:

> - **building**: When a custom environment is building the template image for a new data studio session. The [Wave] service performs the build action. For more information on this status, see [Inspect custom container template build status][build-status].

Reviewer: I know we use code format in another list of statuses, so would be good to be consistent. This is a UI component (hence being bolded) so maybe the other list can be bolded to match it.

- **build-failed**:  When a custom environment build has failed. This is a non-recoverable error. Logs are provided to assist with troubleshooting. For more information on this status, see [Inspect custom container template build status][build-status].
- **starting**: The data studio is initializing.
- **running**: When a data studio session is **running**, you can connect to it, copy the data studio URL, or stop it. In addition, the session can continue to process requests/run computations in the absence of an ongoing connection.
- **stopping**: The recently-running session is in the process of being stopped.
- **stopped**: When a session is stopped, the associated compute resources are deallocated. You can start or delete the data studio when it's in this state.

> - **errored**: This state most often indicates that there has been an error starting the data studio session but it is in a **stopped** state. There might be errors reported by the session itself but these currently will be overwritten with a **running** status if the data studio session is still running.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **errored**: This state most often indicates that there has been an error starting the data studio session but it is in a **stopped** state. There might be errors reported by the session itself but these will be overwritten with a **running** status if the data studio session is still running.
```

  :::tip

>   If you encounter an error with the public preview release of Data Studios [contact Seqera support][contact].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If you encounter an error with the public preview release of Data Studios, [contact Seqera support][contact].
```

  :::

## Session checkpoints

> When you start a session, it automatically creates a *checkpoint*. A checkpoint saves changes that you make to the root filesystem and stores it in the compute environment's pipeline work directory in the `.studios/checkpoints` directory under a unique name. The checkpoint is updated every five minutes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you start a session, it automatically creates a *checkpoint*. A checkpoint saves changes that you make to the root filesystem and stores it in the compute environment's pipeline work directory in the `.studios/checkpoints` folder with a unique name. The checkpoint is updated every five minutes.
```

> When you stop and start a data studio session, or start a new data studio session from a previously created checkpoint, changes such as installed software packages and configuration files are restored and made available in the data studio session. Changes made to mounted datasets are not included in a checkpoint.

Reviewer 2: Mounted datasets, or just mounted data?

Author: @robnewman, do we make the distinction? Thanks!

Reviewer: Let's change it to "mounted data", @jason-seqera.

Checkpoints can be renamed and the name has to be unique per data studio. Spaces in checkpoint names are converted to underscores automatically.

Checkpoint files in the compute environment work directory may be shared by multiple data studios. Each checkpoint file is cleaned up asynchronously after the last data studio referencing the checkpoint is deleted.

:::note

> The cleanup process is a best effort and not guaranteed. Seqera attempts to remove the checkpoint, but it can fail—for example, if the compute environment credentials used do not have sufficient permissions to delete objects from storage buckets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The cleanup process is a best effort and not guaranteed. Seqera attempts to remove the checkpoint, but it can fail if, for example, the compute environment credentials used do not have sufficient permissions to delete objects from storage buckets.
```

---
title: "Overview"
description: "Data Studios public preview."
date: "1 Oct 2024"
tags: [data, studios]
---

> Data Studios is a unified platform where you can host a combination of container images and compute environments for interactive tertiary analysis using your preferred tools, like JupyterLab and RStudio Notebooks, Visual Studio Code IDEs, or Xpra remote desktops. Each data studio session is an individual interactive environment that encapsulates the live environment for dynamic data analysis.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Data Studios is a unified platform where you can host a combination of container images and compute environments for interactive analysis using your preferred tools, like JupyterLab and RStudio Notebooks, Visual Studio Code IDEs, or Xpra remote desktops. Each data studio session is an individual interactive environment that encapsulates the live environment for dynamic data analysis.
```

I've found in the past that the meaning of 'tertiary' analysis isn't obvious to everyone.

> On Seqera Cloud, the free tier permits only one running data studio session at a time. To run simultaneous data studios, [contact Seqera][contact] for a Seqera Cloud Pro license.
> 
> :::note
> Data Studios is currently in **public preview** and is available from Seqera Platform v24.1. If you experience any problems during the deployment process please contact your account executive. Data Studios in Enterprise is not enabled by default. You can enable Data Studios in the [environment variables configuration](../enterprise/data-studios.mdx).
> :::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

:::note
Data Studios is currently in **public preview** and is available from Seqera Platform v24.1. If you experience any problems during the deployment process please contact your account executive. 

On Seqera Cloud, the free tier permits only one running data studio session at a time. To run simultaneous data studios, [contact Seqera][contact] for a Seqera Cloud Pro license.

Data Studios in Enterprise is not enabled by default. You can enable Data Studios in the [environment variables configuration](../enterprise/data-studios.mdx).
:::
```

Select the **Data Studios** tab in Platform to view all data studios. The list includes the name, cloud provider, analysis template, region, author, creation date, and the status of each session. In this view, you can add a new data studio session, as well as start, stop, and connect to an existing data studio session. You can dynamically filter the list of data studio sessions using the search bar and searching by name (default), author username, or compute environment name. Selecting the session name opens a detailed view of the data studio, displaying configuration information.

> ## Requirements

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this go a bit higher?

Reviewer 4: Is there a reason this should go higher? Prior to this we're only intro'ing what Data Studios _is_. This is the first paragraph after that, which discusses what it looks like in the Platform UI. I think it should stay here unless there's a compelling reason to move it.

Reviewer 3: It just read a bit strangely to me. Like I felt like I'd already started doing things and then you stop me to talk about prerequisites.

Author: I see why, though. It is kind of dangling text; it requirements comes first, it needs its own section or to be shoehorned into a different section, since it's kind of a "here's where you find DS in the UI" explanation.

Before you get started, ensure you have the following:

- Valid credentials to access your cloud storage data resources.
- At least the **Maintain** role set of permissions.
- A compute environment with sufficient resources. This is highly dependent on the volume of data you wish to process, but we recommended at least 2 CPUs allocated with 8192 MB of memory. See [AWS Batch](../compute-envs/aws-batch.mdx) for more information about compute environment configuration.
- [Data Explorer](../data/data-explorer.mdx) is enabled.

:::note
Currently, Data Studios only supports AWS Batch compute environments that **do not** have Fargate enabled.
:::

## Container image templates

Data Studios provides four container image templates: JupyterLab, RStudio Server, Visual Studio Code, and Xpra. The image templates install a very limited number of packages when the session container is built. Users have permission to install additional packages as needed.

In addition, you can create your own container image templates. For more information, see [Custom environments][custom-envs].

> **JupyterLab**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**JupyterLab 4.2.5**
```

The default user is the `root` account. The following [conda-forge](https://conda-forge.org/) packages are available by default:

- `altair`
- `ipywidgets`
- `itables`
- `jedi-language-server`
- `jupyter-collaboration`
- `jupyter-dash`
- `jupyterlab-git`
- `jupyterlab`
- `jupytext`
- `nb_black`
- `pandas[all]`
- `pip`
- `plotly`
- `python`
- `qgrid`
- `r-ggplot2`
- `scikit-learn`
- `seaborn[stats]`

> - `statsmodels`

Reviewer 4: @t0randr We should probably pin these to the most recent stable versions and note here so it's clear what we provide out-of-the-box.

Reviewer 5: These are indeed pinned: https://github.com/seqeralabs/connect/blob/967a5316d3d90708281123ef82c08d1bec5a0741/docker/jupyter_4.2.5/env.yaml

I think we should also add the jupyterlab version: `4.2.5` (not yet released in prod)

To install additional Python packages, execute `!pip install <packagename>` commands in your notebook environment. Additional system-level packages can be installed in a terminal window using `apt install <packagename>`.

**RStudio Server**

> 

Reviewer 5: I would add the version of the tool: `4.4.1`

> **RStudio Server**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**RStudio Server 4.4.1**
```

> The default user is the `rstudio` account and has [sudo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sudo) privileges. To install R packages, execute `install.packages("<packagename>")` commands in your notebook environment. Additional system-level packages can be installed in a terminal window using `sudo apt install <packagename>`.

Reviewer 5: @robnewman since the new user is root you don't need `sudo`

> **Visual Studio Code**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Visual Studio Code 1.93.1**
```

[Visual Studio Code][vsc] is an integrated development environment (IDE) that supports many programming languages. The default user is the `root` account. To install extensions, select **Extensions**. Additional system-level packages can be installed in a terminal window using `apt install <packagename>`.

> **Xpra**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Xpra 6.2.0**
```

> 

Reviewer 5: Again version: `1.93.1`

> **Xpra**

Reviewer 5: Version: `6.2.0-r2-1` (maybe r2-1 could be omitted since it's from the os package manager)

[Xpra](https://github.com/Xpra-org/xpra), known as _screen for X_, allows you to run X11 programs by giving you remote access to individual graphical applications. The container template image also installs NVIDIA Linux x64 (AMD64/EM64T) drivers for Ubuntu 22.04 for running GPU-enabled applications. To use these GPU drivers, make sure that your compute environment specifies GPU instance families.

The default user is the `root` account. The image is based on `ubuntu:jammy`. Additional system-level packages can be installed in a terminal window using `apt install <package_name>`.

## Session statuses

Data studios have the following possible statuses:

> 

Reviewer 4: @jason-seqera This looks like it's still missing - is there a reason why you didn't include it here?

> 

Author: @robnewman, wanted to double check placement, was easiest just to incorporate the rest, then circle back after.

---
title: "Overview"
description: "Data Studios public preview."
date: "1 Oct 2024"
tags: [data, studios]
---

Data Studios is a unified platform where you can host a combination of container images and compute environments for interactive analysis using your preferred tools, like JupyterLab and RStudio Notebooks, Visual Studio Code IDEs, or Xpra remote desktops. Each data studio session is an individual interactive environment that encapsulates the live environment for dynamic data analysis.

On Seqera Cloud, the free tier permits only one running data studio session at a time. To run simultaneous sessions, [contact Seqera][contact] for a Seqera Cloud Pro license.

:::note

> Data Studios is currently in **public preview** and is available from Seqera Platform v24.1. If you experience any problems during the deployment process please contact your account executive. Data Studios in Enterprise is not enabled by default. You can enable Data Studios in the [environment variables configuration](../enterprise/data-studios.mdx).

Reviewer 6: Can we change from Account Executive to Support?

**Visual Studio Code 1.93.1**

[Visual Studio Code][vsc] is an integrated development environment (IDE) that supports many programming languages. The default user is the `root` account. To install extensions, select **Extensions**. Additional system-level packages can be installed in a terminal window using `apt install <packagename>`.

**Xpra 6.2.0**

[Xpra](https://github.com/Xpra-org/xpra), known as _screen for X_, allows you to run X11 programs by giving you remote access to individual graphical applications. The container template image also installs NVIDIA Linux x64 (AMD64/EM64T) drivers for Ubuntu 22.04 for running GPU-enabled applications. To use these GPU drivers, make sure that your compute environment specifies GPU instance families.

The default user is the `root` account. The image is based on `ubuntu:jammy`. Additional system-level packages can be installed in a terminal window using `apt install <package_name>`.

## Session statuses

Data studios have the following possible statuses:

> - **building**: When a custom environment is building the template image for a new data studio session. The [Wave] performs the build action. For more information on this status, see [Inspect custom container template build status][build-status].

Reviewer 7: Do we refer to `The Wave` instead of simply `Wave`?

- **build-failed**:  When a custom environment build has failed. This is a non-recoverable error. Logs are provided to assist with troubleshooting. For more information on this status, see [Inspect custom container template build status][build-status].
- **starting**: The data studio is initializing.
- **running**: When a data studio session is **running**, you can connect to it, copy the data studio URL, or stop it. In addition, the session can continue to process requests/run computations in the absence of an ongoing connection.
- **stopping**: The recently-running session is in the process of being stopped.
- **stopped**: When a session is stopped, the associated compute resources are deallocated. You can start or delete the data studio when it's in this state.
- **errored**: This state most often indicates that there has been an error starting the data studio session but it is in a **stopped** state. There might be errors reported by the session itself but these currently will be overwritten with a **running** status if the data studio session is still running.

  :::tip

>   If you encounter an error with the public preview release of Data Studios, please reach out to your [Seqera account executive][contact].

Reviewer 6: Can we change from Account Executive to Support?

  :::

## Session checkpoints

When you start a session, it automatically creates a *checkpoint*. A checkpoint saves changes that you make to the root filesystem and stores it in the compute environment's pipeline work directory in the `.studios/checkpoints` directory under a unique name.

:::note

> The checkpoint is updated every five minutes.

Reviewer 6: IMO this is a minor enough detail it can be in the paragraph above vs. a separate note.

> Running data studios create a new checkpoint, or snapshot, every five minutes.

Reviewer 7: The wording here sounds a bit misleading. A single checkpoint is created per session run, it gets updated with the latest changes to the sessions root filesystem every five minutes.
